+++
title = "Koto 0.14"
template = "news/page.html"
authors = ["Ian Hobson"]
+++

[Koto 0.14][crates] has been released, bringing [API improvements][api-docs] 
and improved [library documentation][lib-docs].

### Koto?

Koto is a free and open-source programming language with the goal of being an
ideal scripting language for Rust applications.

If this is the first time you're reading about Koto, for some background 
information you could take a look at the [About Koto][about] page, 
or you could check out the [language guide][guide].

{% changelog(version="0.14") %}

### Added 

#### API

- `KMap::get` has been introduced as simpler alternative to 
  `KMap::data().get().cloned()`.

#### Libs

- Markdown docs have been added for the extra libs.
- `random.pick` can now be used with objects and maps that implement `@[]`

### Changed

#### API 

- The use of `CallArgs` has been simplified with the introduction of `From`
  implementations for single values, arrays, and slices. 
  - `CallArgs::None` has been removed, instead you can pass in `&[]`.
- The `run_function`/`run_instance_function` methods in `Koto` and `KotoVm` have
  been renamed to `call_function` and `call_instance_function`.

#### Libs

- `regex.find_all` now returns `null` when no matches are found.
- `regex.captures` now doesn't add extra by-index entries for named capture
  groups. `map.get_index` can be used to explicitly retrieve groups by index.

### Removed

#### API

- `Koto::run_exported_function` has been removed. Functions can be accessed via
  `Koto::exports().get()` and then called with `Koto::call_function()`.
- `Koto::run_with_args` has been removed. For equivalent behaviour, 
  `Koto::set_args` can be called before calling `Koto::run`.

### Fixed

#### Language

- Arguments in paren-free function calls no longer require whitespace after
  commas. e.g. `f 1,2,3` would previously be rejected.

{% end %}


[about]: /about
[api-docs]: /docs/latest/api
[crates]: https://crates.io/crates/koto/0.14.0
[guide]: /docs/latest/language
[lib-docs]:/docs/latest/libs
